---
layout: post
language: "en"
image: "assets/images/CoachCorner/minifig.jpg"
title: "Avoiding Team Burnout"
minidescription: ""
author: Arvind Seshan
categories: [ Team Management ]
tag: CoachCorner
featured: false
---

Strategies to Avoid Burnout in FIRST LEGO League Challenge:

<b> Goal Setting </b>:
•	Have the students establish achievable goals for the team based on their abilities, schedules, and effort levels.
•	Break down large tasks into smaller, manageable steps.
•	Celebrate hitting milestones and achieving smaller successes to keep the team motivated.
•	Emphasize quality over quantity. For example, it is often better to complete less missions more reliably than to complete lots of missions.

<b>Time Management</b>:
•	Keep track of dates and deadlines. A large team calendar and task list can help students visualize clearly what needs to be completed by when.
•	Take breaks in the middle of team meetings to enjoy a snack and do a team building activity.
•	Be prepared for additional meeting times closer to a competition and build these into the schedule rather than making them last minute.
•	Avoid last-minute stresses such as making changes to the code or robot in the last week before a competition.
•	Avoid making changes (other than minor ones) at the competition.

<b>Positive Mindset</b>:
•	Encourage a growth mindset where challenges are seen as opportunities for learning and improvement.
•	Focus the team on making progress and learning new skills rather than on winning awards and achieving high scores.
•	Celebrate large and small successes.
•	Discuss and learn from failures together as a team.

<b>Communication and Support</b>:
•	Establish rules and procedures so everyone knows what is expected of them.
•	Maintain open communication within the team to address any concerns or challenges early on.
•	Encourage team members to support each other and seek help when needed.
•	Encourage students to share their accomplishments and frustrations at the end of each meeting in order to celebrate, brainstorm, and get new ideas.
